# Emotion and Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis is perhaps one of the most popular applications of NLP, with a vast number of tutorials, courses, and applications that focus on analyzing sentiments of diverse datasets ranging from corporate surveys to movie reviews. The key aspect of sentiment analysis is to analyze a body of text for understanding the opinion expressed by it. Typically, we quantify this sentiment with a positive or negative value, called polarity. The overall sentiment is often inferred as positive, neutral or negative from the sign of the polarity score.

Usually, sentiment analysis works best on text that has a subjective context than on text with only an objective context. Objective text usually depicts some normal statements or facts without expressing any emotion, feelings, or mood. Subjective text contains text that is usually expressed by a human having typical moods, emotions, and feelings. Sentiment analysis is widely used, especially as a part of social media analysis for any domain, be it a business, a recent movie, or a product launch, to understand its reception by the people and what they think of it based on their opinions or, you guessed it, sentiment!


Typically, sentiment analysis for text data can be computed on several levels, including on an individual sentence level, paragraph level, or the entire document as a whole. Often, sentiment is computed on the document as a whole or some aggregations are done after computing the sentiment for individual sentences. There are two major approaches to sentiment analysis.
 - Supervised machine learning or deep learning approaches
 - Unsupervised lexicon-based approaches

For the first approach we typically need pre-labeled data. Hence, we will be focusing on the second approach. For a comprehensive coverage of sentiment analysis, refer to Chapter 7: Analyzing Movie Reviews Sentiment, Practical Machine Learning with Python, Springer\Apress, 2018. In this scenario, we do not have the convenience of a well-labeled training dataset. Hence, we will need to use unsupervised techniques for predicting the sentiment by using knowledgebases, ontologies, databases, and lexicons that have detailed information, specially curated and prepared just for sentiment analysis. A lexicon is a dictionary, vocabulary, or a book of words. In our case, lexicons are special dictionaries or vocabularies that have been created for analyzing sentiments. Most of these lexicons have a list of positive and negative polar words with some score associated with them, and using various techniques like the position of words, surrounding words, context, parts of speech, phrases, and so on, scores are assigned to the text documents for which we want to compute the sentiment. After aggregating these scores, we get the final sentiment.


Various popular lexicons are used for sentiment analysis, including the following.

AFINN lexicon
Bing Liu’s lexicon
MPQA subjectivity lexicon
SentiWordNet
VADER lexicon
TextBlob lexicon
This is not an exhaustive list of lexicons that can be leveraged for sentiment analysis, and there are several other lexicons which can be easily obtained from the Internet. Feel free to check out each of these links and explore them. We will be covering two techniques in this section.
